[music]
>> Bloomberg Audio Studios. Podcasts,
radio, news.
>> [music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Joe
Weisenthal. And I'm Tracy Alloway.
Tracy, did you see that oil is already
technically in a bear market?
>> [laughter]
>> I did. I did. So, um I think the
definition of a bear market is down Is
it 10 or 20%?
>> 20% yeah. 10% is a correction. That's
right. Okay, so it's down 20% from the
high of I think Brent was at something
like 120 per barrel.
>> Almost 120. 119.50.
>> Yeah. So, yeah, it's coming down.
However, it's still up quite a bit from
where it was like a week ago. Oh, yeah,
absolutely. I mean, it's still up 8%
from Friday. I mean, that's how crazy
the oil market is right now. That
>> moment in time where numbers kind of
lose all meaning, I feel, right?
>> Yes. And obviously, look, we all know
the context, just extraordinary surge. I
think one of the things that's
surprising to me or not maybe not
surprising, but notable to me, and we'll
get into this with our guest, of course,
in a minute, is that Iran war risk was
well known. The price of oil had already
been creeping higher a bit even prior to
the first attack. So, this was already a
concern, but it sort of goes to show
like how I don't know exactly what the
term is, how unexpected or how the
degree to which basically this was not
priced in. The fact that traders were
already very keen and aware that there
was a very high possibility of a strike
in Iran, and yet we've just seen this
absolutely massive surge in just the
span of, you know, 10 days, really.
Well, the thing that's happening now is
because we had pretty good oil supplies
out there at the beginning of the year,
that's kind of become, I guess, a
vulnerability because you had a lot of
oil in floating storage, for instance.
But, that means now the floating storage
is filled and it can't go anywhere
because you can't get through the Strait
of Hormuz, and therefore all the new
production is getting shut in a lot
faster than it would be otherwise. So,
it feels like some of the buffers that
we had are kind of turning into, I
guess, vulnerabilities. Yeah, totally
right. Now, the thing with a lot of
commodity people is that, and I love
them, so this is but [laughter] the
thing
No, but a lot of them are like sort of,
I don't know, like perma-doomers,
like sort of a little bit crankish, a
little bit more always thinking about
risks and so forth and ways that things
could go bad and how it could go back to
the Stone Age if we don't have the
free-flowing commodities of all sorts.
And again, I love them all, but someone
else pointed I forget who tweeted it
over the weekend, but they said like
even the least alarmist, I think it was
might have been Stinson Dean, actually.
He said, "Even the least alarmist people
in the commodity space are very alarmed
right now." And so,
yeah, people are talking about this
being one of the worst oil shocks ever.
I mean, it's very extreme. Joe, if you
worked in an industry whose lifeblood
was the liquefied remains of prehistoric
organisms and there was a finite amount
that you knew one day was going to run
out, you'd be a doomer, too. You're
right. Well, we're going to be speaking
with someone who is not a doomer,
overall very pleasant fellow, but is
someone who is quite alarmed, who thinks
that oil could actually go to $200 a
barrel quite plausibly, depending on how
the war unfolds. I'm very excited. We
haven't talked to him in a while, but a
nod lads' favorite here. We're going to
be speaking with Rory Johnston, founder
of Commodity Context, all around oil
nerd, he even teaches at the University
of Toronto. So, Rory, thank you so much
for coming back on Odd Lots.
Thanks for having me back, guys. Let's
start with this idea that Iran war risk
was already very much on the radar of
traders long before the strikes. The
price had been creeping up, and now
we've seen this huge surge. So, we were
at about I'm looking at the Brent chart.
We were just over $72 a barrel the
weekend before the attack, currently
right around 100. What has happened in
the last, you know, just over a week
that's been so far beyond what traders
might have been anticipated? Yeah, so I
think you very kindly described me as a
reasonable person. I I agree that I
think a lot of people in the commodity
space have a kind of a permabullish
bias. And I think for many of the
reasons Tracy mentioned, when I first
got into the industry, I was very much
like that. Oh oh my goodness, you know,
ISIS took Mosul in in Iraq in 2014,
we're going to, you know, crazy levels.
But I think what we've discovered and
what's been reinforced repeatedly over
the past half decade is just how
flexible and resilient the oil market
is. We've dealt with everything from
COVID to Russia's invasion of Ukraine to
Houthis in the Red Sea to a full-blown
attacks with Iran and Israel last year.
It's gone through a lot, and despite
that, the market has been shockingly
shockingly resilient. These were all the
things that we used to kind of stress
the market with. But I think the
difference is, I think this is kind of
almost in some ways the market's gotten
used to the wrong lesson here, you know,
rather than being doomers, we've gotten
overly sanguine because the market is
able to fix all of these problems. And I
think the market is shockingly
shockingly good at this. But this is one
of those problems, the closure of the
Strait of Hormuz is something that
can't really be fixed by markets. It's
so large and so physical, and you would
kind of mentioned like why this kind of
confounded expectations. You would
mentioned so, you know, over the prior
month or so we had built in upwards of
$10 a barrel largely of Iran risk mostly
from speculative participants kind of
anticipating this. And again, it wasn't
a it wasn't a secret. We had the largest
build-up of US military personnel and
equipment in the Middle East since the
invasion of Iraq in 2003. But them like
myself, I never expected this to happen.
I never expected to see this particular
shock in my lifetime. This was the kind
of this is the scenario that you give
new analysts in the industry as kind of
a thought experiment of, "Okay, if this
happened, how would everything break?"
Because I think it's actually a very
illustrative and educational thought
experiment. It's terrifying to be kind
of speed running it in real time. So, on
this note, when something like the
events of the past week happen, how much
of an oil analyst's job is actually
thinking about supply chain adaptations
and where oil could get rerouted versus
just thinking geopolitics and becoming
an armchair military expert in thinking
like, "Well, this is when the conflict
might actually end." I think it's more
on the supply chain. And I think when we
as oil analysts like look at charts and
data, what we're really trying to do is
both I mean I think honestly to
understand, you know, and see where the
price of oil is in any given day, but
more kind of looking at what those
signals tell us about what's happening
in the underlying market.
And when you have such a massive
dislocation like we're facing right now,
none of those signals act like they
usually do. They're all flying in all
different directions in crazy fashion
because this is such a massive massive
loss. And just again, just to put in
perspective for people what we're
talking about because someone that's not
aware of the market say, "Oh, well, 20%
of the market, 20 million barrels a day
that flow through Hormuz, yeah, that's
we could deal with that, right?" But
that's actually so 20 million barrels is
the peak of COVID demand loss in March
and April of 2020. That was when we were
all locked inside, when airports were
empty and planes were grounded. That was
the type of demand destruction that 20%
looked like. And now, if the straight
remains closed, and I think this is the
critical part here. Whether it's the war
or whatever, and we could talk about all
the ways that this could you know, the
nuances in the way you got to, you know,
slippage and leakage. But if the
straight remains as it is today, we will
need to forcibly kind of adjust the
market to that level of demand, but
without a pandemic. Just via price
signals. That's why 200 plus is at
least, I mean, the longer this goes on,
the higher we go. And it's not just oil.
We'd already seen jet fuel in Asia hit
over $200 a barrel briefly. Because the
product markets are the things that are
actually going to drive that demand
destruction, not crude itself.
Yeah, explain that a little bit further.
The product market. Talk to us a little
bit, when you say that, what do you mean
by that? Yeah, so you and I as global
consumers don't actually typically
consume crude oil. Only Tracy does. Only
Tracy does. Trace Tracy Tracy does,
exactly. Unsuccessfully, but yeah.
I think I think all of us would be
pretty unsuccessful kind of consuming
very, very toxic liquid. But I think,
you know, what we actually consume, jet
fuel, diesel, gasoline, these are things
that are created, distilled, and refined
in a in an oil refinery. So oil
refineries consume crude. So what we
talk about when we talk about, you know,
the blowout in the product market, is
we're talking about So crude oil has a
supply and demand curve, as you, you
know, see in Econ 101. And then each
individual product, gasoline, jet fuel,
diesel, naphtha, petrochemical feed,
everything else, you know, shipping
fuel, they all have their own specific
supply and demand curves. Which this
market becomes like fractally
complicated very quickly. But to
simplify, really what we're talking
about is a refinery taking a, let's say
a barrel of oil for $100, which is
roughly where we're trading right now on
Brent. We're kind of jumping on either
side of 100. They take a barrel of oil
for 100, and they refine it into a bunch
of different products. The premiums they
get for those products are what we
typically call the crack spread or the
difference between crude and a refined
product that that that is yielded from a
refinery. And the refinery margin is
essentially the weighted average blend
of all those crack spreads plus other
costs and everything else. But what's
happening right now and the reason that
we're actually seeing the refined
product market jump ahead of the
consequences in the crude oil market is
that the worst thing for a refinery is
literally running out of crude feed
stock. And actually full credit to June
Go of Sparta Commodities for educating
me more on this cuz I would have
thought, "Wow, product markets are going
insane. Refiners must be chasing as hard
as they can, running as fast as they can
to capture those exceptionally high
margins."
But the issue is is that for them
shutting down a facility is the
worst-case scenario. This is basically a
giant flowing chemistry set that if you
turn it off, it's really, really hard to
kind of turn back on properly and it
takes a lot of time and money and
downtime and then you're not capturing
any of those margins. So what the
refiners are doing, these are the
refiners in Asia that basically have a
massive 20 million barrel a day gap
coming towards them in the market in
terms of feed stock, they're
preemptively reducing activity, reducing
the rate of runs so that they can extend
their runway basically for how long they
can remain in the market at all. So this
means that, you know, with crude oil 2
weeks ago we still had crude flowing out
of the Gulf. It takes a month or two for
those cargoes to get to where they're
going. It's only then that we'll really
start to feel the consequences in the
supply loss and the inventory drain
down, but with the refiners in Asia in
particular preemptively and kind of you
know, adjusting down their run rates,
we're seeing the impacts in Asian
product markets immediately.
>> [music]
[music]
>> So the other thing I want to ask you
about Rory is So, we have strategic
stockpiles that are supposed to help us
get through these types of near-term
supply shocks and, you know, the release
of which is supposed to not only push
down the price of stuff like gasoline,
but also maybe help the refiners keep
going so that they don't have to start
preemptively shutting down capacity.
At the same time, we now have G7
countries that seem to be very reluctant
to release from the stockpiles. And I
should just mention that we're recording
this on March 9th, and you know, there
are all these headlines flying around.
So, who knows what will happen by the
time this episode gets out. And then at
the same time, we also have the US where
there's a lot of chatter about releasing
from the SPR. Talk to us about the pros
and cons of actually dipping into those
strategic stockpiles right now. Yeah, so
I think it's important to note that like
this is the mother of all supply risk.
This is the boogeyman for every oil
analyst when they're kind of learning
the ropes. This is the purpose-built
reason, the scenario precisely that the
SPR was kind of created to mitigate the
risk of.
To me, it's insane that they haven't yet
tapped the reserve already. And I think
speaks to the fact that particularly
Trump administration has tied itself in
knots criticizing the Biden
administration for releasing SPR stocks
in 2022 to offset the Russian supply
shock. Now, just on that very briefly, I
was a big supporter of that release. I
thought that was a clear national
security threat and global economic
threat that Russia posed when they
invaded Ukraine and uh we we thought
we're going to lose so much oil from
Russia. But, it wasn't executed
perfectly, in fairness, but still, I
think that was a good purpose of it. And
now, this is also a very good purpose of
it. We could have refilled more in the
interim, and we should have. Congress
needs to allocate more money to the SPR,
to the Department of Energy. Most of the
money that was earned from the Biden era
sale of the SPR has essentially been
remitted to Congress, so you actually
need to get that money back again. But I
think what we've seen So this morning
the the IEA and G7 countries were
talking about this coordinated release
of 300 to 400 million barrels is what
the Financial Times reported as I saw.
But yeah, they come out and said, "No."
Now, there's a couple of reasons that
you could explain why they could say no.
One, they could be uh hoping and fearing
that things are going to get even worse,
so holding it, you know, closer to the
chest. On that, I would say one of the
big problems is that the collective
release rate of the SPRs around the
world is not 20 million barrels. So, the
crisis is already really, really bad,
and you can't actually fill the gap
entirely with SPRs even if it was
unlimited, which it isn't. Just the flow
rate itself can't keep up. So, if
anything, you kind of need to almost
start easing earlier rather than later.
On the other hand, I think there's this
question of like, maybe, you know,
repeatedly we hear that like Trump
thinks it's going to be a short-lived
shock. Last night, when I was driving in
Ottawa, you know, they were talking
about, you know, this is going to be
short, sharp, and then we're going to
get rid of the Islamic Republic of Iran,
and we're all going to be better off.
But this is not It nothing Nothing that
we've seen so far indicates it's going
to be short and sharp. Again, I'm
shocked we are this far down the road. I
didn't think the president had the
appetite for this kind of
true and utter chaos, and then we're
going to see how long he remains to have
the appetite for that. But that's
essentially the best read I could have
is they think this is short a
short-lived geopolitical sentiment
disruption, when this is really just the
largest physical supply disruption we've
ever seen. The other thing they're
reportedly musing, which is even more
insane and terrifying, is renewing the
export ban on both crude oil and refined
products.
Something that the Biden administration
kind of mused about in late 2022, and I
wrote a piece then on Commodity Context,
that was all about the reasons that that
was a really, really bad idea. That I
appreciate the impulse towards autarky,
particularly given the fact the United
States is the largest oil producer in
the world now. But not only are crude
quality issues at play, you know, the US
produces too much light and doesn't and
still needs to import heavy, but also
there's regional issues that the US Gulf
Coast is a net exporter of diesel, the
US East Coast is a net importer of
gasoline from Europe. So basically, if
you start closing these borders off, all
of these individual regions start to
basically shut down and kind of ossify
in a way that is not at all what I think
President Trump would want, but I no
longer have much faith that they fully
thought any of this through because if
you had, you would have thought about
the SPR, you would have thought about
the insurance, you would have thought
about all of this already, and they just
clearly haven't. Yeah, this is one of
the striking things to me. At least from
everything I've read, there
it sort of seems to have taken them a
little bit by surprise some of the
market re- I mean, it's almost hard to
believe that there wasn't more
anticipating of this when you're going
into war like this, but it does not seem
I certainly get the same impression as
you. By the way, everyone should pull up
that chart of Singapore jet fuel prices.
It almost looks fake. It's just like,
you know, we're $90 a barrel at the end
of February, broke 220,
recently has come in a little bit. So,
talk to us a little bit more about the
sort of relationship between the
duration of the war and the ability to
flip the switch back because it does the
president's communication does seem to
be like, yeah, we're paying a price
right now, but it's going to be worth
it, and then prices are going to come
down. How, you know, as this goes on
longer and longer, to what degree does
everything compound and make it more
difficult to go back to normal?
And I think this is a a topic I was
listening to actually your podcast on
the Strait of Hormuz flow with the
shipping experts exactly on this topic,
and I think you guys nailed it there
that this gets worse every single day it
goes on. But let's talk through the ways
it gets worse. Yeah. So,
when we talk about the Strait of Hormuz,
like you can think of it very simply as
like the world's largest pipeline or
like a big giant garden hose, you know,
through which 20 million barrels of
petroleum flows.
When the strait was closed initially,
you know, for the first day, two, three
days, it's kind of like a kink in the
garden hose. If the conflict had ended
then, which is honestly when I expected
it to end,
you would un-kink the garden hose and
things would get back to normal pretty
quickly. Kind of no harm, no foul. Some
issues, but like you can make that up
pretty quickly. But now, you know, 10
plus days into this, we now have the
equivalent of a 200 million barrel air
gap in the global flow of petroleum,
first of all. Not to mention that in
addition to this kind of kink in the
garden hose, that pressure has built up
because these countries can't export out
of this region anymore. Countries like
Iraq and Kuwait in particular, both of
which lack sufficient domestic storage
capacity cuz they're they just export
the stuff all the time and for for
decades and decades, they have been
forced to shut in production. Now, Iraq,
as of yesterday, shut in over 3 million
barrels a day of production from its
southern Basra fields. That is alone.
Just Iraq alone so far, that is the same
size as the feared loss of Russian
supply in April of 2020 and 2022 that
sent the market, you know, ripping
higher above 120 Brent. Just for
perspective. And and we didn't end up
losing that supply in the Russia case.
We only lost one briefly and it came
back. But in Iraq, we've already lost.
Kuwait, we've already lost it. And the
Emirates and Saudi Arabia, they have
more storage capacity and a bit more
optionality. They can get, you know,
there's a pipeline to the west coast in
the Red Sea in Saudi Arabia that can
divert some of the flow. Similarly with
the United Arab Emirates, you can divert
some flow out the port of Fujairah. The
pipeline to the west coast of Saudi
Arabia can get bombed. If we get to an
existential battle, you know, this keeps
grinding. Same with the ports of of
Fujairah, I think. But again, these
systems can all be broken. So, you've
lost that. So, you've lost supply
structurally, at least for a weeks,
potentially a month, even if the thing
resumed, even if flow resumed tomorrow.
And then on the refine that's on the
exporter or the supply side. On the
demand side and the and the importers in
Asia, like I said, you've already begun
to lose refining runs. And because the
jet fuel is very particular, but I think
rightfully so, so you don't store as
much of it typically. So, I think part
of that giant spike in fuel prices and
jet fuel in particular was this sudden
kind of loss of supply, not a lot of
inventory cover, and all the things all
of these airlines all across Asia is
like, "Wow, I'm not hedged for this. I
need to get every barrel I can right
now." So, I think even if this resolved
right now, which it doesn't look like
it's going to, but even if it did, now
we have a big air gap in the system
that's going to need to work itself out.
And all of these different supply chains
will probably end up taking two, three
months minimum to get back to something
resembling normal. And it doesn't look
like we're we're about to kind of resume
flow through the Strait of Hormuz right
now, despite what the White House says.
I have what is perhaps a silly question,
but does demand destruction actually
exist when it comes to higher oil
prices? I I mean, you know, seriously, I
know that airlines will go bankrupt
eventually because of high oil prices,
but it feels like it is one of those
things that you want to keep using for
as long as you are physically or
financially capable of doing so.
I'll talk about three different angles
here. So, the first is the difference
between the elasticity of price versus
the elasticity of income. So, I think
there's the one question of I think when
we typically think about demand
destruction, we think about primarily
through the lens of like prices got too
high, so I'm not going to drive to work
today. There's also the angle of prices
got so high they crashed the economy and
you lost your job, so you no longer have
to drive to work. So, that is one angle
if this goes on for much longer. We're
not talking like we're talking serious
recession if not like outright global
depressionary conditions if the strait
remains closed for a month plus, you
know, two months. So, there's that's the
one angle. But when we talk about, you
know, I agree. I'm not going to stop
driving my kid to school. I have a
fairly high tolerance for high prices.
But, we live in wealthy advanced
societies. I think what you saw, for
instance, in 2022, I think is
illustrative of this in the LNG market
when there was a very, very high-profile
event when a contracted LNG tanker that
was supposed to land in Pakistan got
diverted and ended up in Europe because
the Europeans were willing to pay way,
way more and basically the LNG supplier
broke the contract that, which economics
dictated, but I think the human cost was
very real. Pakistan just couldn't afford
it. So, what you're going to see here,
let's say again, in this horrible
scenario where the Strait of Hormuz
remains closed until 2027,
um this is what the world would look
like. What you would end up seeing is
massive demand destruction from
lower-income countries that can no
longer afford to get those barrels and
attract them to their shores in the
first place. So, you and I would see
this as massively surging prices at the
pump, and we would grumble, and it would
it would sap our consumer spending
energy, etc., etc. But, the barrels
would likely be there. We are in the
countries that will attract the most
supplies cuz we're willing to pay the
highest prices. But, other lower-income
countries in the world, it's not going
to be a price issue for them. It's going
to be a an outright shortage. And that,
I think, is how demand destruction in
this particular instance [music] would
work.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Talk to us about $200 barrel. How do you
you say So, this is in the cards
potentially. Can you walk us through the
math of how we get there or like why
that seems like where it could go and
not just say 150 or Talk about how you
why that number seems realistic. Yeah,
and I should say, I mean, like 200 is
you guys kind of said in the intro, like
these are just kind of placeholder
numbers at this stage. Like the numbers
stop meaning something when they reach
that high, but just to this point that
you're going to need to keep ratcheting
the price or higher and higher and
higher until a couple things happen. So,
one, even if this continues, even if the
war continues, a lot of this is
predicated on this assumption that the
strait remains completely shut.
Important historical context is that
even during the Tanker Wars of the
1980s, at the peak of the kind of
Iran-Iraq War, when you had I think it
was over 450 ships attacked, 250
tankers, and like 50 of those tankers
were either sunk or scuttled entirely.
Like, a much bigger, more explosive
situation than we're currently even
seeing in the Gulf today, during that
period, you never actually had a
stoppage through the Strait of Hormuz.
You had military escorts, you had other
things, but the oil continued to flow.
In this instance, it's effectively shut.
You're seeing minor, like let's say 5 to
10% of the prior flow go through, but
it's effectively shut. We've never
really seen this before. So, if this
continues, you're you're going to keep
bidding up prices to do one of either
two things. We've talked about demand
destruction, so I think that's one way
the market solves itself. Or, prices get
so crazy high on the other side of the
strait. And the other thing I should
note here is crude prices are probably
effectively negative prices right now on
the wrong side of the strait cuz those
are stranded barrels and no one can get
to them.
>> Oh. But, if you can basically arb that
between effectively negative prices and
potentially the highest prices we've
ever seen in the market, that's a really
compelling economic incentive to take
the risk to cross the strait or to pay
your crews, you know, the sufficient
amount of money to cross the strait or
to afford the exceptionally expensive
war insurance. So, it's it's like that
mad money meme. It's like it that's what
the money's for. It really is that we're
we're trying to basically incentivize
between two awful scenarios. Either
seafarers and tanker owners risking
their lives and their ships going
through the strait to deliver this fuel,
or you're asking people to basically
stop moving, stop moving around the
planet. And neither of those is a very
attractive solution, which is why again
I I just fundamentally can't see this
continuing. I think I keep saying like
Trump's going to taco cuz he has to taco
and people keep criticizing me. They're
like, "No, no, no, it's no longer just
Trump's call. It's it's Netanyahu, it's
the Iranians or whatever." I think
that's probably true. It's not just
Trump's call anymore, but he's still
one, the person that's probably movable
on this by market reaction and two, he's
still probably the most important
incremental voice in that conversation.
So, if he pulled out, I think that does
a lot to de-escalate the situation. I
think that's probably where we need to
go here. I realize we have I don't think
we've mentioned OPEC once in this
conversation which probably says
something about OPEC's relevance today,
but you know, to what extent can OPEC
respond with a big supply increase and
maybe shift some production away from
the Gulf and start firing up output
elsewhere? Yeah, so I think it's a it's
a great question and unfortunately, the
Strait of Hormuz is a risk concept kind
of short circuits the OPEC's normal
reaction. That we're talking about spare
capacity, virtually all the spare
capacity in OPEC is on the wrong side of
the Strait of Hormuz. It's in Iraq,
Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and the UAE. All of
that is currently caught up in this. So,
I think that's part of the challenge and
why the Strait of Hormuz was always the
boogeyman scenario was there's no real
normal way that the market can get
around it. The one major producer that's
within OPEC plus that is likely the
single greatest beneficiary of this is
actually Moscow. So, the Russians had
been under increasing pressure during
you know, the Trump administration had
put a lot of pressure on all of the kind
of what I call like the big sanction
three. You've got Iran, Venezuela and
Russia. Venezuela, we have a regime
change. Iran, we're in the process of
doing so or trying to. And then in
Russia, they said that they were
prioritizing the the war in Ukraine and
they were at various points, but now
they had actually been putting a lot of
pressure on the Russian oil trade.
India, which was the one of the largest
importers of Russian crude, the largest
seaborne importer of Russian crude after
the invasion, with the price cap and
everything else,
they [snorts] got under increasing
pressure on two fronts. One, the Trump
administration issued blocking
sanctions, or like the hefty off, you
know, really really tough sanctions that
were on Iran, issued those on Rosneft
and Lukoil, which are Russia's two
largest crude oil exporting companies.
In addition to that, so the Indians
didn't like that and they started
pulling back purchases there cuz they
were afraid of the sanctions risk. But
then in addition, Trump actually imposed
a specific punitive 25% tariff
on India for being such large importers
of Russian oil. So, over that kind of
between October and say January, we saw
Indian imports of Russian crude drop
from over 2 million barrels a day to
about 1 million barrels a day. So, they
have.
That Russian oil wasn't really go It was
a little bit going more to China, but it
wasn't finding many other buyers. So,
Tracy mentioned that you know, we were
building up a lots and lots of oil on
water. That's where a lot of this was
ending up. So, the prices for these,
like the discounts that you would that
were kind of suffered by Russian
barrels, were exploding. They were
building up on water.
Russia was kind of the oil industry was
on was on its back foot and probably
going to start contracting pretty
meaningfully if that continued. Now,
what are you seeing? Well, all of a
sudden, one of the major places that has
any incremental supply at all to share
on the world is Russia. So, India's back
in the market for Russian crude and the
White House actually explicitly gave
them a waiver for those sanctions that I
I mentioned previously. So, they're
going to start importing a lot more
Russian crude cuz they need to. And even
[snorts] the Europeans have started
clamoring about easing sanctions or
reopening flow on the Druzhba pipeline
to to Eastern Europe and into Germany.
It's a mess. And again, it's a mess that
overwhelmingly serves the interests of
the Kremlin above any kind of other
single national actor in this oil
market. It is pretty striking turn of
events with that, isn't it? You brought
this up earlier, but I feel like this is
going to come up, so we should talk
about it more. There actually was a
headline already. This idea of curbing
exports. And you know, I think in a lot
of people's head it's like, oh, we
produce more oil than we need, we export
them, let's just keep it all at home,
and then prices will come down, etc.
Like I feel like if you're not thinking
second order, it sounds like a totally
fine thing. Walk us through like why you
think that's like a disaster scenario.
Yeah, so I think what would be
compelling to Trump is that in the first
two or three weeks, it would result in
very meaningfully lower pump prices for
US consumers. I think let's just get
that out of the way. But in a way that's
kind of too much of a good thing.
In that what you see is like as an
example of the US Gulf Coast, which is
the major refining hub of the United
States, where you have all of the outlet
from the Permian and all the rest of the
oil fields, and directly into that
refining hub, much of which is exported.
You see a lot of diesel exports, about a
million, million and a half barrels a
day of diesel exports out of the region,
largely going to Mexico, Latin America,
and other areas. If you banned exports,
let's say across the board, what you
would do is you would start building
those inventories at that pace in the US
Gulf Coast. So you would start
overflowing your tanks of diesel, diesel
prices would crash. That would be great
very briefly for your kind of, you know,
drivers of big your your big diesel
trucks and shipping, etc. That's great.
But
eventually you reach the stage where
it's the same kind of thing as you're
seeing from the Gulf exports. You run
out of storage space, and all of a
sudden you can't produce any more
diesel, you can't put it anywhere. That
begins to overflow your tanks, you need
to cut runs. That's when things get bad,
because then you're starting to lose
gasoline supply, you're starting to lose
everything else as well, and all of a
sudden you're going to get turned into
an importer of various fuels. Now,
there's also the issue that you have a
lot of trade between regions. Like like
maybe you could put excess fuel out of
the Gulf Coast into the East Coast. Ah,
well then we get back to your favorite
topic, the Jones Act.
>> Yeah.
>> [laughter]
>> So, I think there's a way that you could
design a very specific policy that was
selective with certain fuels and
everything else. If this was a true like
if Trump wanted to do this for months,
then yeah, I expect him to do something
along these lines and it's going to get
extremely messy. I also don't know if
they can kind of stick handle the
specifics of this industry in the way
that they would need to, but you could
create a scenario that the US basically
cuts itself off from the world and does
so in a way that doesn't completely
destroy the industry. Let's say you
still allow US Gulf Coast diesel
exports.
But I think the other thing here is that
over time the system just continues to
break and erode that all of those
imports into into the US East Coast,
well, those barrels will get
incentivized elsewhere. If you can't
incentive like let's say he goes full
Nixon ala the 1970s oil shocks and not
only do you have an export ban, let's
say you have price caps or price fixing
at the pump. Not outside the realm of
possibility with the current
administration. I think that is where
again you short circuit that mechanism I
mentioned earlier that in the current
situation, we likely in the United
States, Canada, where I'm up right now,
these countries likely will not run out
of fuel. They'll just get very, very
expensive. These policies that the White
House could impose could create a
situation of outright scarcity and
shortages in North America in a way that
we wouldn't be able to pay to get around
them because this whole point so purpose
is to avoid [music] that pump price
spike, but in in doing so you would end
up creating outright shortages instead.
Rory Johnston, it's been too long. I was
going to say we should chat more often,
but you know, I don't want to chat again
too soon because that would be a very
bad sign, but it's very possible that we
might be calling on you again, but thank
you so much for
>> [music]
>> coming on Odd Lots. That was great.
Thanks so much for having me guys.
Always a pleasure.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Tracy, I really I really like talking to
Rory. I thought that was great. I think
one of the interesting dynamics which I
hadn't fully appreciated is that spread
between the products and the price of
crude.
>> I mean that jet fuel I didn't totally
understand why the jet fuel market or
you know, had blown out quite so crazy,
but it makes intuitive sense that when
there's such concern about the capacity
at all to get the input that they have
to already just sort of start slowing
down their pace. Let me just say I don't
like it. I don't like talking to Rory
about how the hypothetical doom
scenarios that every oil analyst has
been thinking about for decades and
decades are now coming to pass and
turning into actual reality. That's not
very fun. But if we're going to talk to
one person about what's happening right
now, I think Rory is a very good person
to talk to. Someone who is not naturally
doomerish in his thinking, but is
nevertheless quite concerned about the
current state of affairs. I think the
risks from a sort of global stability
perspective are very bad when you start
thinking about, okay, here is this war
that the US and Israel launched and then
the ramifications could be that a lot of
the world's poorer countries just get
completely shut off or have to deal with
like crippling oil austerity. The the
fallout from that again setting aside
the specific market fallout and how long
it would take to get the oil market back
to normal the sort of broader fallout
from that dynamic specifically that
everyone's oil prices go up massively or
get cut off strike me as a very
disturbing potential. Well, the other
thing that's rather disturbing is this
idea of Russia as the new swing
producer. Right? And you know, Russia we
all know has strategic goals. You can
imagine a scenario where it very
strategic and political in its decisions
of who gets oil where. So, lots to think
about. Lots to think about. Yeah, cuz
you especially if Europe starts to
soften a little bit on Russian energy. I
don't know. All kinds of weird dominoes
that I think are going to be knocked
over because of this beyond just the
extraordinary price surge. And
meanwhile, lots and lots of episodes
that we need to record. So,
not just oil, we also want to talk about
fertilizer and given the news from
today, it looks like we're going to have
to do a Jones Act episode as well. Jones
Act, SPR, we have a lot to come. It's
all coming. All right, shall we leave it
there for now? Let's leave it there.
This has been another episode of the Odd
Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway. You can
follow me at Tracy Alloway. And I'm Joe
Weisenthal. You can follow me at The
Stalwart. Follow our guest Rory
Johnston. He's at rory_johnston.
Follow our producers Carmen Rodriguez at
carmenurman, Dash Bennett at dashbot,
and Keil Brooks and Keil Brooks. And for
more Odd Lots content, go to
bloomberg.com/oddlots
for the daily newsletter and all of our
episodes. And you can chat about all
these topics 24/7 in our Discord
discord.gg/oddlots.
And if you enjoy Odd Lots, if you like
[music] it when we turn out these
emergency episodes, then please leave us
a positive review on your favorite
podcast [music] platform. And remember,
if you are a Bloomberg subscriber, you
can listen to all of our episodes
absolutely ad-free. All you need to do
[music] is find the Bloomberg channel on
Apple Podcasts and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
>> Mhm.
>> [music]